Ab) he Mian Hersid / Tuesdus, December 18, 1984 A _. _ F El Salv Sass SS EEE eee q 4 ° War-displaced Salvadorans flock lo cities, crealing social upneava SAM DILLON i eo ES sabres hare Bh Staff Writer ; ST pe lh eee re Riper A ee iircrmpatae SAN SALVADOR — Life, so [23S bdmetcitbr oe: Lee Wee eral [Bema eRe: serene and ordered when Maria es : feat su ane GATE Sat ks ae Soh tr oe Carmen Solez lived with her ; ae HE LL OR ere Ata ma family on 28 gently sloping acres Mar ~ ‘ SG ral et: AeEREES Me. of corn and bananas, more or less in 3, Bowe eee ae GHEY Betty — fell apart when she fled the fry a . SAAT RLS PO AON hn of whet Sage pee : soldiers and the bombs for San 3 ya" ON en’ eRe pen SE he, tee It Salvador three years ago. ¥ TN] De Se a Be Seiad “e A striking woman at 49, she is os os pede DERE GOT A Aeicd aSe eae mother of four and matriarch to 19 aes feat PUNE EV) uel Luk “others who huddle together ina by” “ "AY Sa tee acs, three-room squatters’ hut perched _ WY PA yt » ioe ae eat BAN ay hee oe oan at the edge of a 60-foot precipice © py off ay PN Rie yee Rasy Meer ats 12 EEF that drops to the new highway Bi “py v7 4) See PSeaae a4 oA fim en! leading south out of San Salvador. . aa’ RASS SN pee beter SH i Solez and her family are penni- ~ Nd ¢ Vee i SO aed i less. City life lacks the grace she ok Se I FIRE NGS, ewes 3 pe X knew amid the planting and ee (ie FAR NS Ui tires “= Rian eiee harvest cycle of northern Cusca- pi NO ci llsp See rence Mata RY alee tele pee . tlan prdévince. The fetching of [Pf Ls 1B qa Teele slot PASE SO water, gathering of firewood, vee SAM DILLON / Miami Heralc washing of clothes. all have be- Maria Carmen Solez stands outside squatters’ huts where she come, in city squalor, degrading and her family live and frustrating chores. ° schemes, the plan recommends The eggs, beans and corn she The first step will be taken next using the displaced as ‘a reserve . sold to neighbors as a farmer's year with a pilot project aimed at jabor force,” available to privatc wife, she now begs as a ration §00 families and financed with employers “at convenient terms” from missionaries, waiting in line $3.2 million in U.S. funds, accord- that could include partial payment once a month with her tin pailand ing to a U.S. Agency for Interna- with internationally donated food. sacks. daily crises that Sol tional Development official: a e / ‘olez Government officials and docu- thinks of as personal trials are ments reveal deep concern with U.S. funds needed anything but personal; they have- the problems. An Interior Ministry U.S. officials said that AID's become a national phenomenon, document lists the major “reper- pilot project was planned before life’s common denominator for cussions” of the war's forced the Interior Ministry's efforts. but scores of thousands of Salvado- migration: ‘dependency, vagran- that the two projects would even- rans. cy, crime, prostitution, frustra- tually be complementary. Across town, in the glass-and- tion,” and the appearance of what Officials of the government of steel offices of U.S. and Salvado- js termed ‘a marginally parasitic Jose Napoleon Duarte said they * ran analysts, the arrival in the class.” intend to invite Western European cities of thousands of former § The document recommends relo- Jeaders to El Salvador early ir country dwellers is no longer cating an estimated 50,000 people 1985 to solicit non-U.S. .funding viewed as a short-term aberration, to “those areas that constitute the — for the resettlement plans. but the violent, anarchic, wrench- outposts of the development and “ But it appears that the Unitec ing and perhaps irreversible ur- modernization of the country.” States remains the most likely banization of what was until five which according to the document donor of the estimated $53 millior years ago a society where 60 are areas in which irrigation, required for first two years of the Percent of the people lived in the fishery, and reforestation projects plan. country. can be developed. . An unwritten assumption in the : The document recommends that official thinking about resettle- Grim future emergency food rations, donated ment appears to be the gradua’ . largely by the United States, and jessening of military hostilities. Eighty-seven percent of the now distributed free to the dis- something by no means certain. displaced were peasants before placed, be converte! erzdually But in the squatters’ camp that their forced flight. according to 4 into compensation for work on js home to Maria Solez, the arcane recent Interior Ministry study. public projects talk of resettlement and economic Nearly 90 percent have settled in Hinting at what could bc 2 integration raises little hope. or near urban areas, the study coercive cutoff of food rations to Solez has watched two prand- indicates. those who do not relocate. the gaughters die of dysentery in he- The US. Embassy and the pian estimates a 20 percent saving cramped hovel: last week anothcy Planning and Interior ministries jp parsers overt her mercenta"” boy lay feverish on a co: have drawn up plans to resettle of the population “will decline” She rises at 4 a.m. tu pegir thousands of those who have fled relocation and jobs. carrying water from a distar- the countryside. . Among other employment spigot and scrounging firewuod 9. minutes’ walk distant, past :